spend hours on the perfect scene, but
Blender needs days to show you the
results. Got a project deadline coming
up tomorrow, but Blender is saying,
"Nope." Rendering in cycles can be a
huge pain. But it doesn't have to be if
you know what you're doing. There's tons
of reasons why you might want to speed
up your renders. And whether you own the
fastest PC on Earth or a literal potato,
rendering can be very, very frustrating.
Luckily, there's a solution that can be
applied to any project to speed up your
render times. When you're finally able
to hit render on your project, your goal
is a clean and noise-free render as fast
as possible. Sadly, noise-free and fast
don't go hand in hand, which forces you
to start this balancing act of tweaking
settings, optimizing your scene, and
denoising methods. And I think it all
starts with optimization. Most videos on
render speed improvements start with
changing a bunch of settings like
samples and noise threshold. But
sometimes all you really need is to
optimize your scene better. And the
great thing about this is that it might
save you from actually having to lose
quality in terms of samples and those
things later on down the line. Now, as a
benchmark, we have this scene here. It
has many of the common render boogeymen.
A lot of geometry, highquality textures,
and a semi-transparent material. If we
render it with the default Blender
settings, this takes roughly 1 minute
and 20 seconds for a single frame. This
means an animation of around 5 seconds
and 30 fps, which isn't a long one by
the way, would take roughly 10 and 1/2
hours to complete. Um, future Kaizen
here. I consider using a GPU for
rendering a default setting. So,
consider this a PSA for checking whether
you have your GPU enabled and set to the
correct device following this chart.
Also, make sure Blender is using GPU
compute now in the render settings. This
is the hardware that I use by the way
and if you want to test out with this
project for yourself, there's a free
download link in the description so you
can test out too. Please do comment your
render times if you do so. So now we
have our benchmark and there's a lot to
gain here. The first step for
optimization is checking unnecessary
geometry. We want the total geometry now
close to 12.4 million verts to be as low
as possible without losing detail on any
models in the scene. There's actually
two objects in this scene which are
identical cuz I copied them over. This
means that even though they are
identical, Blender is loading all of
that data twice because it's not a
shared copy or a so-called instance by
replacing the second object with an
instance copy [music] which you can add
by going shift a collection instance and
copying the entire collection into an
instance. This immediately halves our
poly and texture count. [music] Next, we
can control the overall geometry density
through a tool called simplify. I've
mentioned it before, and it can be found
and enabled under the render settings.
And by changing the max subdivision
setting in both viewport and render down
to [music] two or three from six, we
immediately lower our overall poly count
to around 1 million. Since the object
here has a subdivision modifier, we can
also set a lower texture limit, which
will effectively lower the overall
texture resolution to decrease the
[music] render time further. The best
thing about the simplify option is that
it affects everything in your scene,
including objects and [music] textures
out of camera, which will still all
attribute to slower renders inside of
Blender. So, it's especially noticeable
on scenes that have tons of objects and
textures. In particular, for HDRI, this
can make a huge difference. Rendering a
default cube scene with a 16K HDRI takes
around 49 seconds for me. And rendering
that same cube scene [music] with the
texture limit set to 1024 takes around
15 seconds. So that's a major
improvement. Now, I do want to note that
if you have a reflective object or you
can actually see the HDRI textures up
close somewhere or the HDRI in the
background for that matter, it will lose
a lot of detail. So you might want to
abstain [music] in that case. Try to set
this value to something sensible and
rerender to see if it's good enough just
to make sure that you don't mess up your
final render. Now, also under simplify,
there's another interesting optimization
that we can use to improve render speed,
and it's called culling. To put it
simply, culling means that objects
outside of your camera bounds are
removed because in 3D, these all still
count towards the total render time,
even though they're not visible in the
frame. Let's enable camera coloring.
There it is. and nothing really happens
because Blender needs to know which
objects it needs to call. So, I'm just
going to select each of these zans here,
then go to the object properties and in
the visibility tab, hold down alt and
click on use camera call. And there we
go. It should now work. Now, do note
that this only works in rendered view.
So, in solid view, it doesn't work. But
in rendered view, [music] it does work.
And it also updates automatically
because when I move this
As you can see, it updates the coloring.
Now, it's a bit laggy because it needs
to update [music] with 11,000 objects,
but in the final render, this will make
a difference. Before the simplify
lowered any textures and subdivisions
like these backup assets that I have out
of frame here, but with camera calling,
it altogether removes them or excludes
them, I should say, from the render.
Again, optimizing our scene for the
[music] render at no difference to the
final product. Now, if you do have tons
of objects close to the camera that you
want to hear in reflections and such,
but they're not in the actual frame, you
know, want to make sure that the margin
here is set up in a way that it doesn't
remove objects that should appear in
your reflections. All right, so with all
of the optimizations done, the new
render comes out to 1 minute and 10
seconds, which is already a [music] nice
save compared to the original, but we
can do a lot better. So, let's get into
step two to get the [music] perfect
quick and clean render settings.
Rendering kind of comes with experience
in Blender, and I've got the perfect
solution to that. Skillshare, the
sponsor of this video. Skillshare offers
literally hundreds of Blender classes,
and there's one in particular that will
teach you all the ins and outs about
Blender's interface, tools, and
settings. Blender 3D crash course for
absolute beginners by Dave Reed. Dave
has a very easygoing and ASMRheavy style
of teaching, making it super nice to
learn the very basics of Blender. I took
the course myself just to see if my
knowledge was up to speed and I'm happy
to say that it was. Anyways, Dave does a
great job explaining and if you're ever
confused about learning Blender and its
interface and tools, just like I was
plenty of times when I began learning
Blender, this class is a great solution
to that. In addition to Blender classes,
Skillshare has tons of creative classes
taught by amazing world-class creatives
on illustration, photography, editing,
design, productivity, and so much more.
So, if you want to learn practically any
skill, the first 500 people to use the
link in my description or scan the QR
code on screen will get a one month free
trial of Skillshare. Make sure to get
started today. It's a pretty broad term
settings because it means everything
from having a GPU enabled with the
[music] latest drivers installed and the
correct render device selected to having
the right amount of samples, noise
threshold, resolution, and tons of other
small tweaks to your render settings.
So, let's begin by determining the
render resolution because it's a nice
starting point to do so. In most cases,
1080p or 1920 * 1080 will be [music]
plenty, but if your PC can handle it,
going bigger is always better for image
clarity. [music] 2K 1440p or 2516 * 1440
is what I tend to use. But if you're
creating animation for currently common
TVs and computer screens, you might even
want to go up to 4K 2160p or 3840 *
2160. By increasing resolution, you
increase render time a lot. Blender
renders based on the amount of pixels it
needs to calculate. The difference
between a 1080p and 4K render is about
6.2
million pixels. The difference alone
between those two is already three times
bigger than the original pixel count of
just a full HD image. And all those
pixels also mean 6.2 [music]
million additional calculations that
Blender needs to do, which for animation
also means that it needs to do all those
millions of calculations extra each
individual frame. And for a longer
animation, this can easily go up to
billions of additional calculations just
because you have a higher resolution.
So, what I'm trying to say here is use
resolution wisely. My advice is to use
the following flowcharts to choose the
right resolution for your project. You
can also find a link to this flowchart
in the description so you can save it
for future reference. In this project, I
have a variation of 2K 1280 * 1440p just
to get a different aspect ratio, but I
still wanted to use the general 1440p
pixel level density. Now, I could go
down to a 1080p version of this and
definitely save on some render time
here. However, because I want to keep
this level of clarity, I'm going to keep
it at 1440p. But do think of your own
specific purpose for your project and
what makes sense. Now, next up, we have
the noise threshold. [music]
This is a super effective setting that
requires a decent amount of back and
forth [music] to get the right value per
project. What noise threshold does is
that it looks at each of those millions
of pixels that comprise your image. And
once that pixel has less noise than the
threshold value, I don't know how that
technically works, but at least that's
what it does. It will stop rendering it.
You can use any value from 0.001 to one
with higher values resulting in faster
and noisier renders. In the [music]
default cube scene, for example, the
difference is night and day with the
noise threshold at 0.001 taking around 5
seconds per frame and with it at one it
[music] takes less than a single second.
I tend to use 0.03 as my default noise
threshold. Sometimes ramping it up to
0.1 depending on the project. Now, in
this case, we have a lot of
translucency, transparency, [music]
so we need to keep it relatively low.
And I think the 0.03 will work just
fine. [music] And all of that leads us
to sampling flashback. Now, in my last
video on render settings, I explained
that I just leave it at 4096, the
default, because the noise threshold
cuts it off at a certain point. Anyways,
now a year later, I still generally
agree with this statement as the sample
count means the amount of samples the
noisiest part of your image is able to
use to clear up each pixel. However,
some projects don't necessarily need
that amount of samples. Visually,
there's hardly a difference in a lot of
cases between 4096 and 2,000 samples.
and sometimes even going as low as 1,000
samples won't make a difference in the
grand scheme of things as we'll fix this
later on with dnoising. [music]
Now, in this case, I think a,000 is
going to be just fine. It's relatively
simple image and doising is doing a
great job in fixing it. So, let's leave
it at a,000. However, the noise
threshold also uses this sample count.
It uses the max samples and it uses the
minimum [music] samples, meaning the
lowest amount of samples any pixel gets.
So the difference is a very noisy pixel
will now get your max samples but a
nonno noisy pixel is getting zero
samples basically or [music] I guess it
would get one. So by default it's set to
zero but to compensate for the higher
noise threshold value that we have and
the lower sample count that we're using.
I think it's good to up the minimum
samples to something like 20. So
basically all parts of the image do get
some samples to work with. It just
generally results in a more clear image,
especially when working with lower
settings. The noise is checked off for
now, even though this is one of the most
important steps to a clean render, but
we'll get back to that later on. For
now, let's move on to all the other
settings. Under the lights tab, there's
a setting called light tree. This is a
setting that samples multiple lights to
clear up noise, which sounds like a good
thing, but also comes at a performance
cost. This scene [music] only has five
lights, which in most cases means the
light tree setting can be disabled. If
you were to render a shot with dozens or
hundreds of lights, like a Christmas
tree for example, you definitely want it
on because it will improve your render
speed significantly. But in a scene with
few lights, like this one, it can go
off. Next, we have the advanced tab,
which for pretty much everyone only has
one important feature, an animated noise
seed. By turning this on, the noise
pattern for every frame will be
different, which feels more natural,
like a camera would produce, and [music]
usually results in a better denoising
result over longer animations. Quick
editor's note here. If you don't want to
mess around with all of this yourself,
you can buy my render preset file to
save you some time and get the best
settings right away. There's a link in
the description down below. Next, we
have a very scene dependent setting that
can shave off [music] a lot of time.
Light paths, specifically the max
bounces. Setting all of these to one
will make your renders ultra fast, but
also usually not very pretty. So, what I
recommend is going into your camera
view, set it to rendered view, enable
viewport denoising, and then set all the
bounces except the total to [music] one.
Now, increase each of them individually
until you don't see any noticeable
difference happening in your viewport.
Finally, set your total bounces to the
added value of the diffuse, glossy,
transmission, and volume. Now below that
there's clamping which I tend to leave
alone as I don't like the effects this
has on scenes. And finally in light bats
we have costics. In a lot of projects I
recommend turning [music] costics off
but as we're working with transparent
and glossy materials here we need to
have it on. This leaves us with the
final settings tab performance. First of
all there's the compositor setting which
I have set to GPU because I own a fast
one but it will depend on your hardware
for you. In hefty compositing scenes,
having it set to GPU can save seconds on
each individual frame, so it's a good
thing to play around with. Okay, so
tiles. Some people claim that having a
lower tile value speeds things up,
[music] but in my testing, it either
didn't make a change at all when I set
it to a higher value, or it made the
render a lot, and I mean a lot slower,
when setting it to a lower value, like
128. I think it's worth play testing
this, but overall um for me it's never
been a net positive, so I just leave it
at the default 2048. Finally, we have
the biggest setting in the performance
tab, persistent data. By enabling this,
Blender stores all the information it
needs to calculate a frame, like the BVH
and multiple importance map, whatever
those are, in your RAM instead of
loading it every frame, resulting in a
new render time of about 13 seconds per
frame. with all of these settings
changed, which is a major improvement
over the initial 1 [music] minute and 20
seconds. But persistent data only kicks
in after rendering your scene, at least
[music]
once before, because it needs to store
the data once. Which brings me to the
most important point when it comes to
settings and the thing that sets it
apart from optimization,
your project. Optimization is always
good. anyone will benefit from removing
unnecessary geometry textures that are
set to high, removing out of camera
objects and you know doing all of these
optimization changes. But everything we
just discussed in the settings chapter
is mainly relevant for animations.
Because if you just want to render a
single frame for a poster or you know
whatever reason you want to render a
single frame, you should just do all
your lookdeaf in the viewport [music]
and when you're ready crank up the
samples, make sure you have the right
resolution and just let it rip. You
know, who cares that it takes an hour?
It's just one time that you have to do
that. Besides, [music] all of these
settings, especially the noise
threshold, samples and light pads are
also very, very custom to your scene. By
doing what I've done in this video, your
scene might be terrible. It might be
slow to render. It might look like crap.
You know, there's a bunch of reasons
[music] to test out all these settings
per project. So, getting this right can
be the difference between a super slow
render and a very fast one, which will
also look great. That is if you at least
know how to do the final and most
important step of rendering, denoising.
It's been a much discussed topic. And to
be frank, it's the only reason we still
have somewhat of our sanity left.
Doising.
>> Without it, getting an acceptably clear
render would easily require 20 [music]
to 30,000 samples. I actually took one
for the team here and did a 20k samples
test render just to show you that it's
still going to be worse [music] than
thousand samples with dnoising. So we
all know that dn noising works [music]
wonders. Which version do you choose
then? I used to be a fan of optics
believing it to be superior especially
for animations. However, with the latest
changes to open image I think it's
become much better [music] than optics.
The results are extremely consistent. It
can use your GPU for dnoising and
there's a bunch of customizability to
it. [music] You can either access it
through the D noiseis checkbox in the
sampling tab or do it through the
compositor. [music]
Personally, I like to use the compositor
and I believe most professional artists
do too just because it offers up more
flexibility. It's really easy to set up.
Go to your view layer tab and enable
dnoising data. Then in the compositor at
the D noiseis node, set it to accurate
quality high and connect all the
required sockets. [music] You can also
enable HDR to preserve HDR colors, which
is good for when you're working with HDR
images, and [music] it preserves these
color values instead of clamping them
down. Not only can you tweak the
strength of the D-noising by recombining
it with the original noisy image, it
also allows you to dn noiseise certain
layers individually, like for example a
mist or a light pass. And this all
sounds like a no-brainer, but it wasn't
3D if there weren't a few drawbacks.
[music]
First of all, it costs time to do
dnoising with slower hardware taking up
to seconds to compute it per frame.
However, it'll always be worth it
compared to a very high sample count in
terms of your total render time to get a
clean image. In this specific project,
it hardly cost any time, and in fact,
the D noiseis render was slightly
faster, clocking in just below 13
seconds. Second, dnoising can lead to
dnoising artifacts, blotchy spots that
make an image look ugly and are
especially noticeable in animations.
We're combating that with the animated
noisy to generate a more natural noise
pattern resulting in this effect being
less visible and by using the open image
D noiseis albido and normal inputs which
were set up in the compositor there to
capture a lot of the data [music] in the
scene instead of losing it to the
dnoising algorithm. This preserves a lot
of detail when using this [music]
specific method for dnoising. But even
with all of that, it can still happen
due to a too low sample count or a too
high noise threshold, leaving the
dinoiser with too much [music] guesswork
to do. So in that moment, you're back to
tweaking your settings to get the best
result possible. Dinoising is
incredible, but it's not a fix all,
[music] and it won't make up for poor
settings and optimization. Luckily, you
now know just how to get the best render
settings possible, which took me years
of failing and getting back up to learn
myself. But you don't have to do all
that because you can learn from my
mistakes in this video right here.
[music]